@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename radius.info

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node Attribute List, , , Top
@chapter Attribute List

The following sections describe the most frequently used @RADIUS{}
attributes. Each attribute is described as follows:

@defattr{@var{name},@var{value},@var{type},@var{user-flags},@var{hints-flags},@var{huntgroup-flags},@var{additivity},@var{prop}}

These values have the following meaning:

@table @var
@item name
The attribute name.
@item value
The attribute number.
@item type
The attribute type.
@item user-flags
Syntax flags defining in which part of @file{raddb/users} entry this
attribute may be used. The flags consist of two letters: @samp{L} means
the attribute can be used in @LHS{}, @samp{R} means it can be used in
@RHS{}. 
@item hints-flags
Syntax flags defining in which part of @file{raddb/hints} entry this
attribute may be used.
@item huntgroup-flags
Syntax flags defining in which part of @file{raddb/huntgroups} entry this
attribute may be used.
@item additivity
@dfn{Additivity} of the attribute determines what happens if a rule
attempts to add to the pair list the attribute, which is already present
in this list. Depending on its value, the actions of the server are:
@table @asis
@item Append
New attribute is appended to the end of the list.
@item Replace
New attribute replaces the old.
@item Drop
New attribute is dropped. The old one remains in the list.
@end table
@item prop
Is the attribute propagated back to the @NAS{} if the server works
in proxy mode.
@end table

The value of @acronym{N/A} in any of this fields signifies ``not
applicable''.


@menu
* Authentication Attributes::
* Accounting Attributes::
* Radius Internal Attributes::
@end menu

@node Authentication Attributes
@section Authentication Attributes

These are the attributes the @NAS{} uses in authentication packets
and expects to get back in authentication replies. These can
be used in matching rules.

@menu
* User-Name:: 
* User-Password:: 
* CHAP-Password:: 
* NAS-IP-Address:: 
* NAS-Port-Id:: 
* Service-Type:: 
* Framed-Protocol:: 
* Framed-IP-Address:: 
* Framed-IP-Netmask:: 
* Framed-Routing:: 
* Framed-MTU:: 
* Framed-Compression:: 
* Reply-Message:: 
* Callback-Number:: 
* Callback-Id:: 
* Framed-Route:: 
* State:: 
* Class:: 
* Vendor-Specific:: 
* Session-Timeout:: 
* Idle-Timeout:: 
* Termination-Action:: 
* Called-Station-Id::
* Calling-Station-Id::
* NAS-Identifier::
* NAS-Port-Type::
@end menu


@comment **************************************************************
@node User-Name
@subsection User-Name
@atindex User-Name

@defattr{User-Name,1,string,LR,-R,LR,Replace,Yes}

This Attribute indicates the name of the user to be authenticated or
accounted. It is used in Access-Request and Accounting attributes. 
The length of the username is usually limited by some arbitrary value.
By default, Radius supports usernames up to 32 characters long. This
value can be modified by redefining @code{RUT_USERNAME} macro in
include/radutmp.h file in the distribution directory and recompiling the
program.

Some @NAS{}es have peculiarities about sending long usernames. For example,
Specialix Jetstream 8500 24 port access server inserts a @samp{/}
character after the 10th character if the username is longer than
10 characters. In such cases, we recommend to apply rewrite functions
in order to bring username to its ``normal'' form (@pxref{rewrite file}).


@comment **************************************************************
@node User-Password
@subsection User-Password
@atindex User-Password

@defattr{User-Password,2,string,L-,--,--,@acronym{N/A},No}

This User-Password attribute indicates the password of the user to be
authenticated, or the user's input following an Access-Challenge.
It is only used in Access-Request packets.

On transmission, the password is hidden.  The password is first
padded at the end with nulls to a multiple of 16 octets.  A one-
way MD5 hash is calculated over a stream of octets consisting of
the shared secret followed by the Request Authenticator.  This
value is XORed with the first 16 octet segment of the password and
placed in the first 16 octets of the String field of the User-Password
Attribute.

If the password is longer than 16 characters, a second one-way MD5
hash is calculated over a stream of octets consisting of the
shared secret followed by the result of the first xor.  That hash
is XORed with the second 16 octet segment of the password and
placed in the second 16 octets of the String field of the 
User-Password Attribute.

If necessary, this operation is repeated, with each xor result
being used along with the shared secret to generate the next hash
to xor the next segment of the password, to no more than 128
characters.

@comment **************************************************************
@node CHAP-Password
@subsection CHAP-Password
@atindex CHAP-Password

@defattr{CHAP-Password,3,string,L-,--,--,@acronym{N/A},No}

This Attribute indicates the response value provided by a PPP
Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP) user in
response to the challenge.  It is only used in Access-Request
packets.

The CHAP challenge value is found in the CHAP-Challenge Attribute
(60) if present in the packet, otherwise in the Request
Authenticator field.

@comment **************************************************************
@node NAS-IP-Address
@subsection NAS-IP-Address
@atindex NAS-IP-Address

@defattr{NAS-IP-Address,4,ipaddr,L-,-R,LR,Append,No}

This Attribute indicates the identifying @IP{} of the @NAS{}
which is requesting authentication of the user.  It is only used
in Access-Request packets. Each Access-Request packet should contain
either @attr{NAS-IP-Address} or @attr{NAS-Identifier} attribute
@ref{NAS-Identifier}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node NAS-Port-Id
@subsection NAS-Port-Id
@atindex NAS-Port-Id

@defattr{NAS-Port-Id,5,integer,LR,-R,LR,Append,No}

This attribute indicates the physical port number of the @NAS{} which
is authenticating the user.  It is only used in Access-Request
packets.  Note that this is using "port" in its sense of a
physical connection on the @NAS{}, not in the sense of a @sc{tcp} or 
@sc{udp} port number.

Some @NAS{}es try to encode various information in the @attr{NAS-Port-Id}
attribute value. For example @sc{max a}scend terminal server constructs
@attr{NAS-Port-Id} concatenating line type (one-digit), line number
(two-digits), and the channel number (two-digits) thus producing
a 5-digit port number. In order to ``normalize'' such encoded
port numbers we recommend to use a rewrite function (@pxref{rewrite file}).
A rewrite function for @sc{max a}scend servers is provided in the
distribution.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Service-Type
@subsection Service-Type
@atindex Service-Type

@defattr{Service-Type,6,integer,LR,-R,LR,Replace,Yes}

@example
VALUE      Service-Type      Login-User           1       
VALUE      Service-Type      Framed-User          2       
VALUE      Service-Type      Callback-Login-User  3       
VALUE      Service-Type      Callback-Framed-User 4       
VALUE      Service-Type      Outbound-User        5       
VALUE      Service-Type      Administrative-User  6       
VALUE      Service-Type      NAS-Prompt-User      7       
VALUE      Service-Type      Authenticate-Only    8       
VALUE      Service-Type      Call-Check           10      
@end example

This attribute indicates the type of service the user has
requested, or the type of service to be provided.  It may be used
in both Access-Request and Access-Accept packets.

When used in an Access-Request the Service type represents a
hint to the Radius server that the @NAS{} has reason to believe the user
would prefer the kind of service indicated.

When used in an Access-Accept, the Service type is an indication
to the @NAS{} that the user must be provided this type of service.

The meaning of various service-types is as follows:

@table @code
@item Login-User
The user should be connected to a host.

@item Framed-User
A Framed Protocol should be started for the User, such as PPP or SLIP.
The @attr{Framed-IP-Address} attribute (@pxref{Framed-IP-Address}) would
supply the @IP{} to be used.

@item Callback-Login-User
The user should be disconnected and called back, then connected to a host.

@item Callback-Framed-User
The user should be disconnected and called back, then a Framed Protocol
should be started for the User, such as PPP or SLIP.

@item Outbound-User
The user should be granted access to outgoing devices.

@item Administrative-User
The user should be granted access to the administrative interface
to the @NAS{} from which privileged commands can be executed.

@item NAS-Prompt
The user should be provided a command prompt on the @NAS{} from which
non-privileged commands can be executed.

@item Authenticate-Only
Only Authentication is requested, and no authorization information needs
to be returned in the Access-Accept

@item Call-Check
@itemx Callback-NAS-Prompt
The user should be disconnected and called back, then provided a command
prompt on the @NAS{} from which non-privileged commands can be executed.

@end table

@comment **************************************************************
@node Framed-Protocol
@subsection Framed-Protocol
@atindex Framed-Protocol

@defattr{Framed-Protocol,7,integer,LR,-R,LR,Replace,Yes}

@example
VALUE      Framed-Protocol   PPP                  1       
VALUE      Framed-Protocol   SLIP                 2       
@end example

This Attribute indicates the framing to be used for framed access.
It may be used in both Access-Request and Access-Accept packets.


@comment **************************************************************
@node Framed-IP-Address
@subsection Framed-IP-Address
@atindex Framed-IP-Address

@defattr{Framed-IP-Address,8,ipaddr,LR,-R,LR,Replace,No}

This Attribute indicates the address to be configured for the
user.  It may be used in Access-Accept packets.  It may be used in
an Access-Request packet as a hint by the @NAS{} to the server that
it would prefer that address, but the server is not required to
honor the hint.

The value @code{0xFFFFFFFF} (@code{255.255.255.255}) indicates that the NAS should
allow the user to select an address. The value @code{0xFFFFFFFE} (@code{255.255.255.254})
indicates that the @NAS{} should select an address for the user (e.g. assigned
from a pool of addresses kept by the @NAS{}).  Other valid values indicate
that the @NAS{} should use that value as the user's @IP{}.

When used in a @RHS{}, the value of this attribute can
optionally be followed by a plus sign. This usage means that
the value of NAS-Port-Id must be added to this @IP{} before
replying. For example

@example
        Framed-IP-Address = 10.10.0.1+
@end example

Also @ref{Add-Port-To-IP-Address}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Framed-IP-Netmask
@subsection Framed-IP-Netmask
@atindex Framed-IP-Netmask

@defattr{Framed-IP-Netmask,9,ipaddr,LR,-R,LR,Replace,No}

This Attribute indicates the IP netmask to be configured for the
user when the user is a router to a network.  It may be used in
Access-Accept packets.  It may be used in an Access-Request packet
as a hint by the @NAS{} to the server that it would prefer that
netmask, but the server is not required to honor the hint.


@comment **************************************************************
@node Framed-Routing
@subsection Framed-Routing
@atindex Framed-Routing

@defattr{Framed-Routing,10,integer,-R,-R,-R,Replace,No}

@example
VALUE      Framed-Routing    None                 0       
VALUE      Framed-Routing    Broadcast            1       
VALUE      Framed-Routing    Listen               2       
VALUE      Framed-Routing    Broadcast-Listen     3       
@end example

This Attribute indicates the routing method for the user, when the
user is a router to a network.  It is only used in Access-Accept
packets.


@comment **************************************************************
@node Framed-MTU
@subsection Framed-MTU
@atindex Framed-MTU

@defattr{Framed-MTU,12,integer,LR,-R,-R,Replace,Yes}

This Attribute indicates the Maximum Transmission Unit to be
configured for the user, when it is not negotiated by some other
means (such as PPP).  It is only used in Access-Accept packets.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Framed-Compression
@subsection Framed-Compression
@atindex Framed-Compression

@defattr{Framed-Compression,13,integer,LR,-R,LR,Replace,Yes}

@example
VALUE      Framed-Compression  None                 0       
VALUE      Framed-Compression  Van-Jacobson-TCP-IP  1       
@end example

This Attribute indicates a compression protocol to be used for the
link.  It may be used in Access-Accept packets.  It may be used in
an Access-Request packet as a hint to the server that the @NAS{}
would prefer to use that compression, but the server is not
required to honor the hint.

More than one compression protocol Attribute may be sent.  It is
the responsibility of the @NAS{} to apply the proper compression
protocol to appropriate link traffic.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Reply-Message
@subsection Reply-Message
@atindex Reply-Message

@defattr{Reply-Message,18,string,-R,--,--,Append,Yes}

This Attribute indicates text which may be displayed to the user.

When used in an Access-Accept, it is the success message.

When used in an Access-Reject, it is the failure message.  It may
indicate a dialog message to prompt the user before another
Access-Request attempt.

When used in an Access-Challenge, it may indicate a dialog message
to prompt the user for a response.

Multiple @attr{Reply-Message} attributes may be included and if any are displayed,
they must be displayed in the same order as they appear in the
packet.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Callback-Number
@subsection Callback-Number
@atindex Callback-Number

@defattr{Callback-Number,19,string,-R,--,--,Replace,No}

This Attribute indicates a dialing string to be used for callback.
It may be used in Access-Accept packets.  It may be used in an
Access-Request packet as a hint to the server that a Callback
service is desired, but the server is not required to honor the
hint.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Callback-Id
@subsection Callback-Id
@atindex Callback-Id

@defattr{Callback-Id,20,string,-R,--,--,Replace,No}

This Attribute indicates the name of a place to be called, to be
interpreted by the @NAS{}.  It may be used in Access-Accept packets.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Framed-Route
@subsection Framed-Route
@atindex Framed-Route

@defattr{Framed-Route,22,string,-R,--,--,Replace,No}

This Attribute provides routing information to be configured for
the user on the @NAS{}.  It is used in the Access-Accept packet and
can appear multiple times.

@comment **************************************************************
@node State
@subsection State
@atindex State

@defattr{State,24,string,LR,LR,LR,Append,No}

This Attribute is available to be sent by the server to the client
in an Access-Challenge and MUST be sent unmodified from the client
to the server in the new Access-Request reply to that challenge,
if any.

This Attribute is available to be sent by the server to the client
in an Access-Accept that also includes a Termination-Action
Attribute with the value of RADIUS-Request.  If the @NAS{} performs
the Termination-Action by sending a new Access-Request upon
termination of the current session, it MUST include the State
attribute unchanged in that Access-Request.

In either usage, no interpretation by the client should be made.
A packet may have only one @attr{State} Attribute.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Class
@subsection Class
@atindex Class

@defattr{Class,25,string,LR,LR,LR,Append,No}

This Attribute is available to be sent by the server to the client
in an Access-Accept and should be sent unmodified by the client to
the accounting server as part of the Accounting-Request packet if
accounting is supported.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Vendor-Specific
@subsection Vendor-Specific
@atindex Vendor-Specific

@defattr{Vendor-Specific,26,string,LR,-R,-R,Append,No}

This Attribute is available to allow vendors to support their own
extended Attributes not suitable for general usage.
@c [FIXME: some more detail over the VSAs ]

@comment **************************************************************
@node Session-Timeout
@subsection Session-Timeout
@atindex Session-Timeout

@defattr{Session-Timeout,27,integer,-R,--,--,Replace,Yes}

This Attribute sets the maximum number of seconds of service to be
provided to the user before termination of the session or prompt.
The server may send this attribute to the client in an Access-Accept
or Access-Challenge.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Idle-Timeout
@subsection Idle-Timeout
@atindex Idle-Timeout

@defattr{Idle-Timeout,28,integer,-R,--,--,Replace,Yes}

This Attribute sets the maximum number of consecutive seconds of
idle connection allowed to the user before termination of the
session or prompt.  The server may send this attribute to the client
in an Access-Accept or Access-Challenge.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Termination-Action
@subsection Termination-Action
@atindex Termination-Action

@defattr{Termination-Action,29,integer,LR,-R,-R,Replace,No}

@example
VALUE      Termination-Action  Default              0       
VALUE      Termination-Action  RADIUS-Request       1       
@end example

This Attribute indicates what action the @NAS{} should take when the
specified service is completed.  It is only used in Access-Accept
packets.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Called-Station-Id
@subsection Called-Station-Id
@atindex Called-Station-Id

@defattr{Called-Station-Id,30,string,L-,-R,LR,Append,No}

This Attribute allows the @NAS{} to send in the Access-Request packet
the phone number that the user called, using Dialed Number
Identification (DNIS) or similar technology.  Note that this may be
different from the phone number the call comes in on.  It is only
used in Access-Request packets.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Calling-Station-Id
@subsection Calling-Station-Id
@atindex Calling-Station-Id

@defattr{Calling-Station-Id,31,string,L-,-R,LR,Append,No}

This Attribute allows the @NAS{} to send in the Access-Request packet
the phone number that the call came from, using Automatic Number
Identification (ANI) or similar technology.  It is only used in
Access-Request packets.

@comment **************************************************************
@node NAS-Identifier
@subsection NAS-Identifier
@atindex NAS-Identifier

@defattr{NAS-Identifier,32,string,L-,-R,LR,Append,No}

This Attribute contains a string identifying the @NAS{} originating
the Access-Request.  It is only used in Access-Request packets.
Either @attr{NAS-IP-Address}  or @attr{NAS-Identifier} should be present in an
Access-Request packet.

@xref{NAS-IP-Address}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node NAS-Port-Type
@subsection NAS-Port-Type
@atindex NAS-Port-Type

@defattr{NAS-Port-Type,61,integer,--,--,--,Append,No}

@example
VALUE      NAS-Port-Type     Async                0       
VALUE      NAS-Port-Type     Sync                 1       
VALUE      NAS-Port-Type     ISDN                 2       
VALUE      NAS-Port-Type     ISDN-V120            3       
VALUE      NAS-Port-Type     ISDN-V110            4       
@end example

This Attribute indicates the type of the physical port of the @NAS{}
which is authenticating the user.  It can be used instead of or in
addition to the @attr{NAS-Port-Id} @ref{NAS-Port-Id} attribute.  It is only used in
Access-Request packets.  Either @attr{NAS-Port} or @attr{NAS-Port-Type} or
both should be present in an Access-Request packet, if the @NAS{}
differentiates among its ports.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Accounting Attributes
@section Accounting Attributes

These are attributes the @NAS{} sends along with accounting requests.
These attributes can not be used in matching rules.

@menu
* Acct-Status-Type:: 
* Acct-Delay-Time::
* Acct-Input-Octets::
* Acct-Output-Octets::
* Acct-Session-Id::
* Acct-Authentic::
* Acct-Session-Time::
* Acct-Input-Packets::
* Acct-Output-Packets::
* Acct-Terminate-Cause::
@end menu

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Status-Type
@subsection Acct-Status-Type
@atindex Acct-Status-Type

@defattr{Acct-Status-Type,40,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

@example
VALUE           Acct-Status-Type        Start                   1
VALUE           Acct-Status-Type        Stop                    2   
VALUE           Acct-Status-Type        Alive                   3
VALUE           Acct-Status-Type        Accounting-On           7
VALUE           Acct-Status-Type        Accounting-Off          8
@end example

This attribute indicates whether this Accounting-Request marks the
beginning of the user service (Start) or the end (Stop).

It may also be used to mark the start of accounting (for example,
upon booting) by specifying Accounting-On and to mark the end of
accounting (for example, just before a scheduled reboot) by specifying
Accounting-Off.

A special value Alive or Interim-Update indicates the packet that
contains some additional data to the initial Start record or to the
last Alive record.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Delay-Time
@subsection Acct-Delay-Time
@atindex Acct-Delay-Time

@defattr{Acct-Delay-Time,41,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

This attribute indicates how many seconds the client has been
trying to send this record for, and can be subtracted from the
time of arrival on the server to find the approximate time of the
event generating this Accounting-Request.  (Network transit time
is ignored.)

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Input-Octets
@subsection Acct-Input-Octets
@atindex Acct-Input-Octets

@defattr{Acct-Input-Octets,42,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

This attribute indicates how many octets have been received from
the port over the course of this service being provided, and can
only be present in Accounting-Request records where the
Acct-Status-Type is set to Stop.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Output-Octets
@subsection Acct-Output-Octets
@atindex Acct-Output-Octets

@defattr{Acct-Output-Octets,43,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

This attribute indicates how many octets have been sent to the
port in the course of delivering this service, and can only be
present in Accounting-Request records where the Acct-Status-Type
is set to Stop.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Session-Id
@subsection Acct-Session-Id
@atindex Acct-Session-Id

@defattr{Acct-Session-Id,44,string,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

This attribute is a unique Accounting @sc{id} to make it easy to match
start and stop records in a log file.  The start and stop records
for a given session must have the same Acct-Session-Id.  An
Accounting-Request packet must have an Acct-Session-Id.  An
Access-Request packet may have an Acct-Session-Id; if it does,
then the @NAS{} must use the same Acct-Session-Id in the Accounting-Request
packets for that session.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Authentic
@subsection Acct-Authentic
@atindex Acct-Authentic

@defattr{Acct-Authentic,45,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

@example
VALUE           Acct-Authentic          RADIUS          1
VALUE           Acct-Authentic          Local           2
VALUE           Acct-Authentic          Remote          3
@end example

This attribute may be included in an Accounting-Request to
indicate how the user was authenticated, whether by Radius, the
@NAS{} itself, or another remote authentication protocol.  Users who
are delivered service without being authenticated should not
generate Accounting records.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Session-Time
@subsection Acct-Session-Time
@atindex Acct-Session-Time

@defattr{Acct-Session-Time,46,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

This attribute indicates how many seconds the user has received
service for, and can only be present in Accounting-Request records
where the Acct-Status-Type is set to Stop.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Input-Packets
@subsection Acct-Input-Packets
@atindex Acct-Input-Packets

@defattr{Acct-Input-Packets,47,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

This attribute indicates how many packets have been received from
the port over the course of this service being provided to a
Framed User, and can only be present in Accounting-Request records
where the Acct-Status-Type is set to Stop.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Output-Packets
@subsection Acct-Output-Packets
@atindex Acct-Output-Packets

@defattr{Acct-Output-Packets,48,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

This attribute indicates how many packets have been sent to the
port in the course of delivering this service to a Framed User,
and can only be present in Accounting-Request records where the
Acct-Status-Type is set to Stop.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Terminate-Cause
@subsection Acct-Terminate-Cause
@atindex Acct-Terminate-Cause

@defattr{Acct-Terminate-Cause,49,integer,--,--,--,@acronym{N/A},@acronym{N/A}}

@example
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    User-Request            1
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Lost-Carrier            2
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Lost-Service            3
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Idle-Timeout            4
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Session-Timeout         5
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Admin-Reset             6
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Admin-Reboot            7
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Port-Error              8
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    NAS-Error               9
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    NAS-Request             10
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    NAS-Reboot              11
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Port-Unneeded           12
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Port-Preempted          13
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Port-Suspended          14
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Service-Unavailable     15
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Callback                16
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    User-Error              17
VALUE           Acct-Terminate-Cause    Host-Request            18
@end example

This attribute indicates how the session was terminated, and can
only be present in Accounting-Request records where the Acct-
Status-Type is set to Stop.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Radius Internal Attributes
@section Radius Internal Attributes

These are attributes, used by GNU Radius during the processing
of a request. They are never returned to @NAS{}. Mostly, they are
used in matching rules.

@menu
* Auth-Type::
* Auth-Data::
* Menu::
* Termination-Menu::
* Prefix::
* Suffix::
* Group::
* Crypt-Password::
* Huntgroup-Name::
* Simultaneous-Use::
* Strip-User-Name::
* Fall-Through::
* Add-Port-To-IP-Address::
* Exec-Program::
* Exec-Program-Wait::
* Acct-Ext-Program::
* Hint::
* Pam-Auth::
* Login-Time::
* Replace-User-Name::
* Rewrite-Function::
* Match-Profile::
* Scheme-Procedure::
* Scheme-Acct-Procedure::
* Log-Mode-Mask::
* Acct-Type::
@end menu

@comment **************************************************************
@node Auth-Type
@subsection Auth-Type
@atindex Auth-Type

@defattr{Auth-Type,1000,integer,L-,-R,-R,Append,No}

@example
VALUE      Auth-Type         Local                0       
VALUE      Auth-Type         System               1       
VALUE      Auth-Type         Crypt-Local          3       
VALUE      Auth-Type         Reject               4       
VALUE      Auth-Type         SQL                  252     
VALUE      Auth-Type         Pam                  253     
VALUE      Auth-Type         Accept               254     
@end example

This attribute tells the server which type of authentication
to apply to a particular user. It can be used in @LHS{} of
the user's profile. @xref{Authentication}.

Radius interprets values of @attr{Auth-Type} attribute as follows:

@table @code
@item Local
The value of the @attr{User-Password} attribute from the record is taken
as a cleantext password and is compared against the @attr{User-Password} value
from the input packet. 

@item System
This means that a user's password is stored in a system password type.
Radius queries the operating system to determine if the username/password
supplied in the incoming packet are OK.

@item Crypt-Local
The value of the @attr{User-Password} attribute from the record is taken
as an MD5 hash on the user's password. Radius generates MD5 hash
on the supplied @attr{User-Password} value and compares both strings.

@item Reject
Authentication fails.

@item Accept
Authentication succeeds.

@item SQL
@itemx Mysql
The MD5-encrypted user's password is queried from the @sc{sql} database
@ref{SQL Auth}. @code{Mysql} is an alias maintained for compatibility
with other versions of Radius.

@item Pam
The username/password combination is checked using PAM.

@end table

@comment **************************************************************
@node Auth-Data
@subsection Auth-Data
@atindex Auth-Data

@defattr{Auth-Data,2006,string,L-,-R,-R,Replace,@acronym{N/A}}

The @attr{Auth-Data} can be used to pass additional data to the
authentication methods that need them. In version @value{VERSION}
of GNU Radius, this attribute may be used in conjunction with
@code{SQL} and @code{Pam} authentication types. When used with
@code{Pam} authentication type, this attribute holds the name
of @acronym{PAM} service to use. This attribute is temporarily
appended to the authentication request, so its value can be
referenced to as @code{%C@{Auth-Data@}}. 
@xref{Authentication Server Parameters}, for an example of
of using @attr{Auth-Data} attribute in @file{raddb/sqlserver}:

@comment **************************************************************
@node Menu
@subsection Menu
@atindex Menu

@defattr{Menu,1001,string,-R,--,--,Replace,No}

This attribute should be used in the @RHS{}. If it is used, it should
be the only reply item.

The @attr{Menu} attribute specifies the name of the menu to be presented
to the user. The corresponding menu code is looked up in
@file{RADIUS_DIR/menus/} directory (@pxref{menus file}).


@comment **************************************************************
@node Termination-Menu
@subsection Termination-Menu
@atindex Termination-Menu

@defattr{Termination-Menu,1002,string,-R,--,--,Replace,No}

This attribute should be used in the @RHS{}. If it is used, it should
be the only reply item.

The @attr{Termination-Menu} specifies the name of the menu file to be
presented to the user after finishing his session. The corresponding
menu code is looked up in @file{RADIUS_DIR/menus/} directory
(@pxref{menus file}).

@comment **************************************************************
@node Prefix
@subsection Prefix
@atindex Prefix

@defattr{Prefix,1003,string,L-,L-,LR,Append,No}

The @attr{Prefix} attribute indicates the prefix which the username
should contain in order for a particular record in the profile
to be matched. This attribute should be specified in @LHS{}
of the @file{users} or @file{hints} file.

For example, if the @file{users} file contained:

@example
DEFAULT Prefix = "U", Auth-Type = System
                Service-Type = Login-User
@end example

@noindent
then usernames @samp{Ugray} and @samp{Uyoda} would match this record,
whereas @samp{gray} and @samp{yoda} would not.

Both @attr{Prefix} and @attr{Suffix} attributes may be specified in
a profile. In this case the record is matched only if the username
contains both prefix and suffix specified.

@ref{Suffix}
@ref{Strip-User-Name}

@comment **************************************************************
@node Suffix
@subsection Suffix
@atindex Suffix

@defattr{Suffix,1004,string,L-,L-,LR,Append,No}

The @attr{Suffix} attribute indicates the suffix which the username
should contain in order for a particular record in the profile
to be matched. This attribute should be specified in @LHS{}
of the @file{users} or @file{hints} file.

For example, if the @file{users} file contained:

@example
DEFAULT Suffix = ".ppp", Auth-Type = System, Strip-User-Name = Yes
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
                Framed-Protocol = PPP        
@end example

@noindent
then usernames @samp{gray.ppp} and @samp{yoda.ppp} would match this record,
whereas @samp{gray} and @samp{yoda} would not.

Both @attr{Prefix} and @attr{Suffix} attributes may be specified in
a profile. In this case the record is matched only if the username
contains both prefix and suffix specified.

@ref{Prefix}
@ref{Strip-User-Name}

@comment **************************************************************
@node Group
@subsection Group
@atindex Group

@defattr{Group,1005,string,L-,L-,LR,Append,No}

@comment **************************************************************
@node Crypt-Password
@subsection Crypt-Password
@atindex Crypt-Password

@defattr{Crypt-Password,1006,string,L-,--,--,Append,No}

This attribute is intended to be used in user's profile @LHS{}.
It specifies the MD5 hash of the user's password. When this attribute
is present, Auth-Type = Crypt-Local is assumed. If both @attr{Auth-Type}
and @attr{Crypt-Password} are present, the value of @attr{Auth-Type} is
ignored.

@xref{Auth-Type}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Huntgroup-Name
@subsection Huntgroup-Name
@atindex Huntgroup-Name

@defattr{Huntgroup-Name,221,string,L-,-R,LR,Append,No}

The @attr{Huntgroup-Name} can be used either in @LHS{} of the
@file{users} file record or in @RHS{} of the @file{huntgroups}
file record.

When encountered in a @LHS{} of a particular @file{users} profile,
this attribute indicates the huntgroup name to be matched. Radius looks
up the corresponding record in the @file{huntgroups} file. If such
record is found, each @AVP{} from its reply-list is compared against
the corresponding pair from the request being processed. The request
matches only if it contains all the attributes from the specified
huntgroup, and their values satisfy the conditions listed in the
huntgroup pairs.

For example, suppose that the authentication request contained the
following attributes:

@example
User-Name = "john",
User-Password = "guess",
NAS-IP-Address = 10.11.11.1,
NAS-Port-Id = 24
@end example

@noindent
Let us further suppose that the @file{users} file contains the following
entry:

@example
john    Huntgroup-Name = "users_group",
                Auth-Type = System
        Service-Type = Login
@end example

@noindent
and, finally, @file{huntgroups} contains the following entry:

@example
users_group     NAS-IP-Address = 10.11.11.1
                NAS-Port-Id < 32
@end example

Then the authentication request would succeed since it contains
@attr{NAS-Port-Id} attribute and its value is less than 32.

@xref{huntgroups file}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Simultaneous-Use
@subsection Simultaneous-Use
@atindex Simultaneous-Use

@defattr{Simultaneous-Use,1034,integer,L-,-R,-R,Append,No}

This attribute specifies the maximum number of simultaneous logins
a given user is permitted to have. When the user is logged in this
number of times any surplus attempts to log in are rejected.

@xref{Checking Simultaneous Logins}.
 
@comment **************************************************************
@node Strip-User-Name
@subsection Strip-User-Name
@atindex Strip-User-Name

@defattr{Strip-User-Name,1035,integer,LR,LR,-R,Append,No}

@example
VALUE      Strip-User-Name   No                   0       
VALUE      Strip-User-Name   Yes                  1       
@end example

The value of @attr{Strip-User-Name} indicates whether Radius should
strip any prefixes/suffixes specified in the user's profile from the
user name. When set to @code{Yes} the usernames would be logged and
accounted without any prefixes/suffixes.

A user may have several usernames for different kind of services. In
this case differentiating the usernames by their prefixes and stripping
them off before accounting would help keeping accounting records
consistent.

For example, let's suppose the @file{users} file contains:

@example
DEFAULT Suffix = ".ppp",
                Strip-User-Name = Yes,
                Auth-Type = SQL
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
                Framed-Protocol = PPP

DEFAULT Suffix = ".slip",
                Strip-User-Name = Yes,
                Auth-Type = SQL
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
                Framed-Protocol = SLIP
@end example

@noindent
Now, user @samp{johns} having a valid account in @sc{sql} database
logs in as @samp{johns.ppp}. He then is provided the PPP service,
and his PPP session is accounted under username @samp{johns}.
Later on, he logs in as @samp{johns.slip}. In this case he is
provided the SLIP service and again his session is accounted
under his real username @samp{johns}.


@comment **************************************************************
@node Fall-Through
@subsection Fall-Through
@atindex Fall-Through

@defattr{Fall-Through,1036,integer,LR,LR,--,Append,No}

@example
VALUE      Fall-Through      No                   0       
VALUE      Fall-Through      Yes                  1       
@end example

The @attr{Fall-Through} attribute should be used in reply-list.
If its value is set to @code{Yes} in a particular record, it
indicates to Radius that it should continue looking up another records
even when this record matches the request. It can be used to provide
default values for several profiles.

Consider the following example. Let's suppose the @file{users} file
contains the following:

@example

johns   Auth-Type = SQL
                Framed-IP-Address = 11.10.10.251,
                Fall-Through = Yes

smith   Auth-Type = SQL
                Framed-IP-Address = 11.10.10.252,
                Fall-Through = Yes

DEFAULT NAS-IP-Address = 11.10.10.1
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
                Framed-Protocol = PPP

@end example

@noindent
Then after successful matching of a particular user's record,
the matching will continue until it finds the DEFAULT entry,
which would add its @RHS{} to the reply pairs for
this request. The effect is, that if user @samp{johns} authenticates
successfully it gets the following reply pairs:

@example
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
        Framed-Protocol = PPP,  
        Framed-IP-Address = 11.10.10.251
@end example

@noindent
whereas user @code{smith} gets

@example
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
        Framed-Protocol = PPP,  
        Framed-IP-Address = 11.10.10.252
@end example

@noindent
@emph{Note} that the attribute @attr{Fall-Through} itself
is never returned to the @NAS{}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Add-Port-To-IP-Address
@subsection Add-Port-To-IP-Address
@atindex Add-Port-To-IP-Address

@defattr{Add-Port-To-IP-Address,1037,integer,-R,-R,--,Replace,No}

@example
VALUE      Add-Port-To-IP-Address  No                   0       
VALUE      Add-Port-To-IP-Address  Yes                  1       
@end example

If this attribute is present in the @RHS{} and has the value
of @code{Yes}, then the value of @attr{NAS-Port-Id} attribute from
the authentication request will be added to the value of
@attr{Framed-IP-Address} attribute from the @RHS{}, and 
resulting value will be returned in @attr{Framed-IP-Address}
attribute to the @NAS{}.

This provides the simplest form of organizing @IP{} pools.

This attribute is implicitly added to the @RHS{} when the
value of a @attr{Framed-IP-Address} attribute ends with @samp{+}
sign. For example the following:

@example
        Framed-IP-Address = 10.10.0.1+
@end example
@noindent
is equivalent to

@example
        Framed-IP-Address = 10.10.0.1,
        Add-Port-To-IP-Address = Yes
@end example

@comment **************************************************************
@node Exec-Program
@subsection Exec-Program
@atindex Exec-Program

@defattr{Exec-Program,1038,string,-R,--,--,Replace,No}

When present in @RHS{}, the @attr{Exec-Program} attribute specifies
the full pathname and arguments for the program to be executed when the
entry matches.

The command line can reference any attributes from both check and reply
pairlists using attribute macros (@pxref{Macro Substitution}).

Before the execution of the program @command{radiusd} switches to
uid and gid of user @code{daemon}, group @code{daemon}. You can
override these defaults by setting variables @code{exec-program-user}
and @code{exec-program-group} in configuration file to proper values
@ref{option,, The option statement}.

The daemon does not wait for the process to terminate.

@subheading Example

Suppose the @file{users} file contains the following entry:

@example
DEFAULT Auth-Type = System,
                Simultaneous-Use = 1
        Exec-Program = "/usr/local/sbin/logauth \
                        %C@{User-Name@} \
                        %C@{Calling-Station-Id@}"
@end example

@noindent
Then, upon successful matching, the program
@file{/usr/local/sbin/logauth} will be executed. It will get as its
arguments the values of @attr{User-Name} and @attr{Calling-Station-Id}
attributes from the request pairs.


@comment **************************************************************
@node Exec-Program-Wait
@subsection Exec-Program-Wait
@atindex Exec-Program-Wait

@defattr{Exec-Program-Wait,1039,string,-R,--,--,Replace,No}

When present in @RHS{}, the @attr{Exec-Program-Wait} attribute specifies
the full pathname and arguments for the program to be executed when the
entry matches.

The command line can reference any attributes from both check and reply
pairlists using attribute macros @ref{Macro Substitution}.

Before the execution of the program @command{radiusd} switches to
uid and gid of user @code{daemon}, group @code{daemon}. You can
override these defaults by setting variable @code{exec-program-user}
in configuration file to a proper value.
@ref{option,, The option statement}.

The daemon will wait until the program terminates. The return value
of its execution determines whether the entry matches. If the program
exits with a non-zero code then the match fails. If it exits with a
zero code, the match succeeds. In this case the standard output of the
program is read and parsed as if it was a pairlist. The attributes
thus obtained are added to the entry's reply attributes.

@subheading Example

Suppose the @file{users} file contains the following entry:

@example
DEFAULT Auth-Type = System,
                Simultaneous-Use = 1
        Exec-Program-Wait = "/usr/local/sbin/telauth \
                             %C@{User-Name@} \
                             %C@{Calling-Station-Id@}"
@end example

@noindent
Then, upon successful matching, the program
@file{/usr/local/sbin/telauth} will be executed. It will get as its
arguments the values of @attr{User-Name} and @attr{Calling-Station-Id}
attributes from the request pairs.

The @file{/usr/local/sbin/telauth} can, for example, contain the
following:

@example
#! /bin/sh

DB=/var/db/userlist

if grep "$1:$2" $DB; then
        echo "Service-Type = Login,"
        echo "Session-Timeout = 1200"
        exit 0
else
        echo "Reply-Message = \"You are not authorized to log in\""
        exit 1
fi
@end example

@noindent
It is assumed that @file{/var/db/userlist} contains a list of
@code{username}:@code{caller-id} pairs for those users that are
authorized to use login service.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Acct-Ext-Program
@subsection Acct-Ext-Program
@atindex Acct-Ext-Program

@defattr{Acct-Ext-Program,2008,string,--,-R,--,Replace,@acronym{N/A}}

The @attr{Acct-Ext-Program} attribute can be used in @RHS{} of an
@file{raddb/hints} entry to specify the full path and attributes
of an external program to be executed for each accounting request.

The command line can reference any attributes from both check and reply
pairlists using attribute macros (@pxref{Macro Substitution}).

Before the execution of the program @command{radiusd} switches to
uid and gid of user @code{daemon}, group @code{daemon}. You can
override these defaults by setting variables @code{exec-program-user}
and @code{exec-program-group} in configuration file to proper values
@ref{option,, The option statement}.

The accounting program must exit with status 0 to indicate a successive
accounting.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Hint
@subsection Hint
@atindex Hint

@defattr{Hint,1040,string,L-,-R,-R,Append,No}

Use @attr{Hint} attribute to specify additional matching criterium
depending on the hint (@pxref{hints file}).

Let the @file{hints} contain:

@example
DEFAULT         Prefix = "S", Strip-User-Name = No      Hint = "SLIP"
@end example

@noindent
and the @file{users} file contain:

@example
DEFAULT Hint = "SLIP",
                NAS-IP-Address = 11.10.10.12,
                Auth-Type = System
        Service-Type = Framed-User,
                Framed-Protocol = SLIP
@end example

@noindent

Then any user having a valid system account and coming from @NAS{}
@samp{11.10.10.12} will be provided SLIP service if his username
starts with @samp{S}.
                
@comment **************************************************************
@node Pam-Auth
@subsection Pam-Auth
@atindex Pam-Auth

@defattr{Pam-Auth,1041,string,L-,-R,-R,Append,No}

The @attr{Pam-Auth} attribute can be used in conjunction with

@example
Auth-Type = Pam
@end example

@noindent
to supply the PAM service name instead of the default @samp{radius}.
It is ignored if @attr{Auth-Type} attribute is not set to @code{Pam}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Login-Time
@subsection Login-Time
@atindex Login-Time

@defattr{Login-Time,1042,string,L-,--,--,Append,No}

The @attr{Login-Time} attribute specifies the time range when the user
is allowed to log in. The attribute should be specified in @LHS{}.

Format of the @attr{Login-Time} string is the same as that of UUCP
time ranges. The following description of time range format is
adopted from the documentation for Taylor UUCP package:

A time string may be a list of simple time strings separated with a
vertical bar @samp{|} or a comma @samp{,}.

Each simple time string must begin either with a day of week abbreviation
(one of: @samp{Su}, @samp{Mo}, @samp{Tu}, @samp{We}, @samp{Th},
@samp{Fr}, or @samp{Sa}), or @samp{Wk} for any day between Monday and
Friday inclusive, or @samp{Any} or @samp{Al} for any day.

Following the day may be a range of hours separated with a hyphen using
24 hour time.  The range of hours may cross 0; for example
@samp{2300-0700} means any time except 7 AM to 11 PM.  If no time is
given, calls may be made at any time on the specified day(s).  

The time string may also be the single word @samp{Never}, which does not
match any time.

Here are a few sample time strings with an explanation of what they
mean.

@table @samp

@item Wk2305-0855,Sa,Su2305-1655

This means weekdays before 8:55 AM or after 11:05 PM, any time Saturday,
or Sunday before 4:55 PM or after 11:05 PM.  These are approximately the
times during which night rates apply to phone calls in the U.S.A.  Note
that this time string uses, for example, @samp{2305} rather than
@samp{2300}; this will ensure a cheap rate phone call even if the
computer clock is running up to five minutes ahead of the real time.

@item Wk0905-2255,Su1705-2255

This means weekdays from 9:05 AM to 10:55 PM, or Sunday from 5:05 PM to
10:55 PM.  This is approximately the opposite of the previous example.

@item Any

This means any day.  Since no time is specified, it means any time on
any day.

@end table


@comment **************************************************************
@node Replace-User-Name
@subsection Replace-User-Name
@atindex Replace-User-Name

@defattr{Replace-User-Name,2001,string,LR,LR,--,Append,No}

@example
VALUE      Replace-User-Name  No                   0       
VALUE      Replace-User-Name  Yes                  1       
@end example

Use this attribute to modify username from the incoming packet. The
@attr{Replace-User-Name} can reference any attributes from both @LHS{}
and @RHS{} pairlists using attribute macros @ref{Macro Substitution}.

For example the following @file{users} entry

@example
guest   NAS-IP-Address = 11.10.10.11,
                Calling-Station-Id != ""
                Auth-Type = Accept
        Replace-User-Name = "guest#%C@{Calling-Station-Id@}",
                Service-Type = Framed-User,
                Framed-Protocol = PPP
@end example

@noindent
Allows usage of PPP service for username guest, coming from @NAS{}
@samp{11.10.10.11} with non-empty @attr{Calling-Station-Id} attribute.
The string consisting of @samp{#} character followed by
@attr{Calling-Station-Id} value is appended to the username.


@comment **************************************************************
@node Rewrite-Function
@subsection Rewrite-Function
@atindex Rewrite-Function

@defattr{Rewrite-Function,2004,string,LR,LR,LR,Append,No}

The @attr{Rewrite-Function} attribute specifies the name of the
rewriting function to be applied to the request. The attribute
may be specified in either pairlist in the entries of
@file{hints} or @file{huntgroups} configuration files.

The corresponding function should be defined in @file{rewrite} as

@example
integer @var{name}()
@end example

@noindent
i.e. it should return integer value and should not take any arguments.

@xref{rewrite file,, Packet rewriting rules}.
@xref{hints file}.
@xref{huntgroups file}.

@comment **************************************************************
@node Match-Profile
@subsection Match-Profile
@atindex Match-Profile

@defattr{Match-Profile,2004,string,LR,-R,-R,Append,No}

The Match-Profile attribute can be used in @LHS{} and @RHS{} lists of a
user profile. Its value is the name of another user's profile (target
profile). When Match-Profile is used in the @LHS{}, the incoming
packet will match this profile only if it matches the target profile.
In this case the reply pairs will be formed concatenating the @RHS{}
lists from both profiles.
When used in @RHS{}, this attribute causes the reply pairs
from the target profile to be appended to the reply from the current
profile if the target profile matches the incoming request.

For example:

@example
IPPOOL  NAS-IP-Address = 10.10.10.1
                Framed-Protocol = PPP, Framed-IP-Address = "10.10.10.2"

IPPOOL  NAS-IP-Address = 10.10.11.1
                Framed-Protocol = PPP, Framed-IP-Address = "10.10.11.2"

guest   Auth-Type = SQL
                Service-Type = Framed-User,
        Match-Profile = IPPOOL
@end example

In this example, when user ``guest'' comes from @NAS{} @code{10.10.10.1} he is
assigned @IP{} @code{10.10.10.2}, otherwise if he is coming from @NAS{}
@code{10.10.11.1} he is assigned @IP{} @code{10.10.11.2}.
                
@comment **************************************************************
@node Scheme-Procedure
@subsection Scheme-Procedure
@atindex Scheme-Procedure

@defattr{Scheme-Procedure,2009,string,-R,--,--,Append,@acronym{N/A}}

The @attr{Scheme-Procedure} attribute is used to set the name
of Scheme authentication procedure. @xref{Authentication with Scheme}, for
the information about how to write Scheme authentication procedures.

@node Scheme-Acct-Procedure
@subsection Scheme-Acct-Procedure
@atindex Scheme-Acct-Procedure

@defattr{Scheme-Acct-Procedure,2010,string,--,-R,--,Replace,@acronym{N/A}} 

The @attr{Scheme-Acct-Procedure} attribute is used to set the name
of Scheme accounting procedure. @xref{Accounting with Scheme}, for
the information about how to write Scheme accounting procedures.

@node Log-Mode-Mask
@subsection Log-Mode-Mask
@atindex Log-Mode-Mask

@defattr{Log-Mode-Mask,2007,integer,L-,-R,-R,Append,@acronym{N/A}}

@example
VALUE		Log-Mode-Mask		Log-Auth		1
VALUE		Log-Mode-Mask		Log-Auth-Pass		2
VALUE		Log-Mode-Mask		Log-Failed-Pass		4
VALUE		Log-Mode-Mask		Log-Pass		6
VALUE		Log-Mode-Mask		Log-All			7
@end example

@attr{Log-Mode-Mask} is used to control the verbosity of authentication
log messages for given user or class of users. The meaning of its
values is:

@table @code
@item Log-Auth
Do not log successful authentications.
@item Log-Auth-Pass
Do not show password with the log message from a successful authentication.
@item Log-Failed-Pass
Do not show failed password.
@item Log-Pass
Do not show plaintext password, either failed or succeeded.
@item Log-All
Do not log authentications at all.
@end table

Technical details: After authentication, the server collects all
@attr{Log-Mode-Mask} attributes from the incoming request and @LHS{}
of the user's entry. The values of these attributes @sc{or}'ed together
form a mask which is applied via @sc{xor} operation to the current log
mode. The value thus obtained is used as effective log mode.

@node Acct-Type
@subsection Acct-Type
@atindex Acct-Type

@defattr{Acct-Type,2003,integer,L-,-R,-R,Append,@acronym{N/A}}

@example
VALUE		Acct-Type		None	0
VALUE		Acct-Type		System	1
VALUE		Acct-Type		Detail	2
VALUE		Acct-Type		SQL	3
@end example

The @attr{Acct-Type} allows to control which accounting methods
must be used for a given user or a group of users. In the absense
of this attribute, all currently enabled accounting types are used.
@xref{Accounting}, for more information about accounting types.

