@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Bugs, Info, , Top
@chapter Reporting Bugs

It is possible you will encounter a bug in one of Radius programs. If this
happens we would like to hear about it. As the purpose of bug reporting
is to improve software, please be sure to include maximum information
when reporting a bug. The information needed is:

@itemize @bullet
@item Conditions under which the bug appears.
@item Version of the package you are using.
@item Compilation options used when configuring the package.
@item If the bug is found in @code{radiusd} daemon, run
@samp{radiusd -v} and include the output it produces.
@item Contents of radius configuration directory (@value{RADDB} or whatever
you have set it to while configuring).
@item Log messages produced.
@end itemize

Send your report to bug-gnu-radius@@gnu.org. Allow me a couple of
days to answer.

@comment *******************************************************************
@node Info, , Bugs, Top
@chapter Where to get info about GNU Radius

To obtain announcements and progress information about GNU Radius
project subscribe to the mailing list info-gnu-radius. To subscribe
either visit @url{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/info-gnu-radius}
or send a letter to info-gnu-radius@@gnu.org with the following line
in its subject or body:

@example
subscribe [@var{password}] [@var{digest-option}] [address=@var{address}]
@end example
@noindent
Your password must be given to unsubscribe or change your options.
When you subscribe to the list, you'll be reminded of your password
periodically. @var{digest-option} may be either: @samp{nodigest} or
@samp{digest} (no quotes, please!)  If you wish to subscribe an address
other than the address you send this request from, you may specify
"address=@var{email address}".

You can also send a letter with a single word @samp{help} in its subject
to obtain more detailed help on this list.


