@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Builddbm, Radscm, Radctl, Top
@section Builddbm
@pindex buildbm

@subheading Usage
@code{Builddbm} converts the plaintext Radius users database into
DBM files. Some versions of Radius daemon have used this to
speed up the access to the users database.

However in this implementation things go the other way around.
The server reads entire plaintext database, converts it into internal
form and stores into hash table which provides for fast
access. Actually, using DBM version of the users database slows
down the access unless the machine which runs Radius daemon is
short of address space for the daemon to store the users database into.

@subheading Syntax
When used without arguments, @code{builddbm} utility attempts to
convert file @file{raddb/users} into @file{raddb/users.db} or
@file{raddb/users.pag}, @file{raddb/users.dir} pair, depending on the
version of DBM library used.

If used with one argument, the argument is taken as the name of the
plaintext database file to operate upon.

Use the following command line options to modify the operation of
@code{buildbm}:

@table @samp
@item -d @var{dir}
Specifies alternate directory for the Radius configuration
files. This defaults to @file{@value{raddb}}.

@item -h
Outputs short usage summary and exits with 0 exit code.
@end table
