@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Intro, Glossary, Copying, Top
@unnumbered Introduction to Radius

Radius is a system serving for authentication and accounting. The name
RADIUS (all capitals) stands for Remote Authentication in Dial-In User
Service and usually denotes the underlying protocol name.

Historically, radius servers were used as a means to authenticate the user
coming from a dial-in connection, but GNU Radius is much more than an
authentication system: it is an advanced, customizable and extensible system
for controlling access to the network.

GNU Radius has several built-in authentication and accounting methods.
When these methods are not enough, it allows administrator to implement
any new method he deems convenient. 

GNU Radius includes radius server program capable of serving authentication
and accounting requests, and a set of accompanying programs designed to
monitor the activity of the server and analyze the information it provides.

@comment *******************************************************************
@node Glossary, Naming conventions, Intro, Top
@unnumbered Radius Glossary

Throughout this document the following terms are used:

@table @asis

@item RADIUS
(All capitals) The Remote Authentication in Dial-In User Service
protocol as described in RFC 2138, 2865 and 2866.

@cindex NAS
@cindex Network Access Server
@item NAS
NAS stands for Network Access Server. It is a computer or a special device
designed to provide access to the network. For example, it can be a
computer connected to the network and equipped with several modems. Such
NAS would allow the user connecting to one of its modems to access the
network. 

@cindex Service
@item Service
A service, such as PPP, SLIP, telnet, etc., provided to a user by the NAS.

@cindex Session
@item Session
Every single instance of a service. Session starts when the service was
first provided and ends when the service is ended. A user may have multiple
sessions active simultaneously if he is allowed to.

@cindex Session ID
@item Session ID
Session Identifier. A string of characters uniquely identifying the session.

@cindex A/V pair
@cindex Attribute
@cindex Attribute-Value pair
@item A/V pair
Stands for Attribute-Value pair @ref{Attributes}. 

@cindex Dial-In user
@cindex Dial-Up user
@item Dial-In or Dial-Up user
A user connecting to a service through the modem line.

@item User Database
A database in which Radius server keeps information about users, their
authentication information, etc.

@item User's Profile
A record in the User Database describing a particular user. User's
Profile keeps the authentication and authorization information for
that user, i.e. it contains data describing how this user should
be authenticated as well as which services he is allowed to be
provided and parameters of these services.

@end table

