@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Naming conventions, Operation, Glossary, Top
@chapter Naming conventions.
@cindex naming conventions

This chapter describes file naming conventions used throughout this
document.

Programs from the GNU Radius package use the following directories
to store various configuration and log files:

@table @dfn
@item Configuration or database directory
A directory where all configuration files are stored.

@item Log directory
A directory where @command{radiusd} stores its radius files.

@item Accounting directory
A directory where @command{radiusd} stores accounting detail files
@ref{Detailed Request Accounting}.

@end table

The default locations of these directories are determined at compile
time. These are:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .15 .45
@item Directory @tab Short Name @tab Default location 

@item Configuration directory
@cindex Configuration directory
@cindex @file{raddb}
@tab raddb
@tab @value{RADDB}

@item Log directory
@cindex Log directory
@cindex @file{radlog}
@tab radlog
@tab @value{RADLOG}

@item Accounting directory
@cindex Accounting directory
@cindex radacct
@tab radacct
@tab @value{RADACCT}

@end multitable

Throughout this document we will refer to these directories by their
short names, e.g. saying

@example
... this information is contained in file @file{raddb/sqlserver} 
@end example

@noindent
we actually mean @file{@value{RADDB}/sqlserver}.

If necessary, locations of these directories can be overridden by
specifying appropriate command line options to a program. For
example, any program from the GNU Radius package accepts command
line option @option{-d} or @option{--directory}, which introduces
the configuration directory path. 

