@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radctl, Builddbm, Radauth, Top
@chapter Radctl
@pindex radctl

@command{Radctl} is a control interface to @command{radiusd} daemon. It allows
user running it to query @command{radiusd} about various aspects of its
work and issue administrative commands to it. 

@command{Radctl} communicates with radius using either a regular
UNIX-style signal interface or a special @sc{udp} control channel.

@menu
* Signal Interface::            Invoking radctl to use signal interface.
* Control Channel::             Using radius control channel.
@end menu

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node Signal Interface, Control Channel, , Radctl
@section Signal Interface
@cindex signaling radius
@cindex radctl, signal interface

In order to use the signal interface invoke @command{radctl} with
@option{-s} or @option{--signal} option. The usage is:

@example
radctl -s @var{command} [@var{args}]
@end example

Where @var{command} is a command telling @command{radctl} which actions to
take, and @var{args} are optional arguments to the command. Only one
command can be specified per invocation.

The valid @var{command}s are as follows:

@table @code

@item start [@var{args}]
If @command{radiusd} is not running already, it is started. When
present, @var{args} are passed as the command line to the
server.

@item stop
Stops running @command{radiusd}.

@item restart [@var{args}]
Stops the server and then starts it again. When present, @var{args}
are passed as the command line to the server.

@item reload
Causes running @command{radiusd} server to re-read its configuration files.

@item dumpdb
Tells @command{radiusd} to dump its user hash table into the file
@file{@value{RADLOG}/radius.parse}. This can be used for debugging 
configuration files.

@item status
@command{radiusd} reports its memory usage statistics. The information is
logged under @code{Info} log level.

@item which
Reports the information about the running copy of @command{radiusd}.

@end table

No special configuration is needed in order to use radius signal
interface.

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node Control Channel, , Signal Interface, Radctl
@section Control Channel
@cindex control channel
@cindex radctl, control channel

Control channel offers much more flexible monitoring and control
capabilities than regular UNIX-style signal interface. @command{Radctl}
uses control channel when invoked without @option{-s} option.

When using control channel interface, @command{radctl} switches to
interactive mode, which allows you to directly send commands to
the server and to immediately see the server replies.

Since this option uses @sc{udp} channel, special attention must be paid
to security issues while configuring the server.

@menu

* Configuring: radctl configuration.    Configuring radius to use
                                        control channel.
* Invocation: radctl invocation.        How to invoke @command{radctl}.
* Commands: radctl commands.            Commands available in interactive
                                        mode.
@end menu

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node radctl configuration, radctl invocation, , Control Channel
@subsection Configuring @command{radctl}.
@cindex configuring radctl
@cindex radctl, configuring
@cindex radctl.rc file
@heading Configuring radius daemon

To configure Radius to use @command{radctl} control channel the following
actions must be performed:

@table @asis

@item Configure the port number to listen to.
The port number to listen to incoming control requests is set in
@code{cntl} statement in @file{config} file.

@item Create administrative huntgroup.
Since @command{radctl} interface provides some potentially dangerous
commands, we recommend to restrict its usage to some trusted
hosts. This can be done using huntgroups mechanism (@pxref{huntgroups file}).
The administrative huntgroup definition should include the
trusted host @IP{} and name of a command which is allowed from
this host. The command name must be listed in @attr{State} attribute.
See example below.

@item Create administrative user.
The administrative user profile should be created in the @file{users}
file. It should be restricted to administrative huntgroup.

@end table

@heading Example @command{radctl} configuration.

In the example below, we suppose that port 5000 is chosen as Radius
administrative port, administrative user name is ROOT, and he is
allowed to connect only from localhost. Then the following modifications
would be needed:

@subheading @file{config} file

@example
cntl @{
        port 5000;
@};
@end example

@subheading @file{huntgroups} file

@example
ROOT    NAS-IP-Address = 127.0.0.1, State = "getpid"            NULL
ROOT    NAS-IP-Address = 127.0.0.1, State = "get-m-stat"        NULL
ROOT    NAS-IP-Address = 127.0.0.1, State = "get-q-stat"        NULL
ROOT    NAS-IP-Address = 127.0.0.1, State = "reload"            NULL
ROOT    NAS-IP-Address = 127.0.0.1, State = "restart"           NULL
ROOT    NAS-IP-Address = 127.0.0.1, State = "shutdown"          NULL
ROOT    NAS-IP-Address = 127.0.0.1, State = "dumpdb"            NULL
@end example

@subheading @file{users}

@example
ROOT    Auth-Type = System,
                Huntgroup-Name = "ROOT"
        Service-Type = RADIUS-Administrative-User
@end example

@heading Configuring radctl

Upon startup @command{radctl} reads file @code{@value{RADDB}/radctl.rc},
then file @code{@var{$HOME}/.radctl}. Both are usual Scheme sources. This is
an example of @file{radctl.rc} file:

@lisp
;; Define a list of available servers. 
(set! rad-server-list
;;         ID      Hostname  Secret   Auth Acct Cntl
;;       -------------------------------------------
      '(("local" "localhost" "foobar" 1645 1646 5000)))

;; Set client source address
(rad-client-source-ip "127.0.0.1")
;; Set timeout and the number of retransmission retries
(rad-client-timeout 3)
(rad-client-retry 2)
;; Select default server to use
(rad-select-server "local") 
@end lisp

@emph{Please note}, that the shared secret is listed in plaintext,
as a usual Scheme string. Thus, special attention must be paid to
security issues. The file @file{radctl.rc} should be owned by root
and have permissions of at least 0600.

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node radctl invocation, radctl commands, radctl configuration, Control Channel
@subsection How to invoke @command{radctl}.
@cindex radctl, invocation

When started in control channel mode, @command{radctl} understands the
following command line options:

@table @option
@item -d DIR
@itemx --directory DIR
Specifies the directory where radius dictionary files and
@file{radctl.rc} file reside.

@item -S HOST
@itemx --server HOST
Specifies the name of the server to connect to. @emph{Please note} that
this is not a domain name, but rather the server @sc{id} under which it was
registered using @samp{(set! rad-server-list ...)} statement in
@file{radctl.rc} file. [FIXME:add reference]

@item -u USERNAME
@itemx --user USERNAME
@itemx -l USERNAME
@itemx --login USERNAME
Specifies the username. If you start @command{radctl} without this option,
you will have to issue @code{user} command from inside it.

@item -p PASSWORD
@itemx --password PASSWORD
Specifies the password to be used while connecting to the
server. Special password @samp{.} (dot) tells @command{radctl} to
prompt you for the password with terminal echoing turned off.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Enable verbose mode. In verbose mode all conversation with the
Radius server is echoed on stderr.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Display short usage help and exit.
@end table

@comment **L3***************************************************************
@node radctl commands, , radctl invocation, Control Channel
@subsection Radctl commands
@cindex radctl commands
@cindex commands, radctl

A command in radctl interactive mode consists of a command verb and
optional arguments. Any non-ambiguous abbreviated form of a command
verb is accepted. Command arguments, however, may not be abbreviated.

Commands fall into two groups: those that control the behavior of
the @command{radctl} monitor itself, and those that are sent directly
to the server.

@subheading Internal commands

These commands modify the behavior of radctl itself.

@table @code

@item help
Output short help information.

@item quit
@itemx bye
Exit the program.

@item server
Display the @sc{id} of the current radius server.

@item server @var{id}
Set current radius server.

@itemx verbose
Toggle verbose mode on/off. When verbose mode is on, @command{radctl}
displays to stderr detailed log of its conversation with Radius
server.

@item login @var{name}
@itemx user @var{name}
Use @var{name} as administrative user login name.

@item password @var{pass}
Use the specified password. If @samp{.} (dot) is entered instead of
plaintext password, @command{radctl} reads the password from
@file{/dev/tty} with character echoing turned off and generation
of signals by tty special characters disabled. This reduces the
possibility of the password being compromised.

@item list
@itemx list active
Display detailed information about current radius server.

@item list avail
List available radius servers. Only server @sc{id} and hostname 
(or @IP{}) are listed.

@end table

@subheading Server commands

These are sent directly to the server:

@table @code
@item getpid
Output the @sc{pid} of the master Radius process.

@item get-m-stat
Display detailed memory usage statistics.

@item get-q-stat
Display detailed queue statistics. Four fields are displayed for each
queue:
@enumerate 1
@item Queue number
@item Number of pending requests
@item Number of processed requests still residing in the queue
@item Total number of requests in queue
@end enumerate

@item dumpdb
Tells @command{radiusd} to dump its user database, i.e. the parsed
contents of files @file{hints}, @file{huntgroups} and @file{users}
to disk file. The filename is @file{radlog/radius.parse}
@ref{Naming conventions}.

@item reload @var{what}
Instructs the server to reload a particular part of its configuration.
The @var{what} argument specifies which of the configuration files to reload:

@table @code
@item all
Reload all configuration files.

@item users
Reload the @file{users} file.

@item dict
Reload @file{dictionary} file. This implies reloading of @file{users},
@file{huntgroups} and @file{hints}.

@item huntgroups
Reload @file{huntgroups} file.

@item hints
Reload @file{hints} file.

@item clients
Reload @file{clients} file.

@item naslist
Reload @file{naslist} file.

@item realms
Reload @file{realms} file.

@item deny
Reload @file{access.deny} file.

@item sql
Reload @file{sqlserver} file.

@item rewrite
Reload @file{rewrite} file.

@end table

@item restart
Instructs Radius to flush all request queues and restart itself. In
order to use this command, the @command{radiusd} program should have
been started with its full pathname.

@item shutdown
Instructs Radius to flush all pending requests and shut down.

@item suspend
Tells radiusd to stop servicing incoming requests. The server becomes
idle and listens only to the control channel.

@item continue
Undo the effect of the last @code{suspend} command.

@end table

