@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radlast, Raduse, Radwho, Top
@chapter Radlast
@pindex radlast

The @command{radlast} utility lists sessions of specified users, @NAS{}es,
@NAS{} ports and hosts, in reverse time order. By default, each line of output
contains the login name, @NAS{} short name and port number from where the
session was conducted, host @IP{} or name, the start and stop
times for the session, and the duration of the session. If the session
is still continuing, @command{radlast} will so indicate.

When specified the @option{-l} option, @command{radlast} produces long
output. It includes following fields:

@itemize @bullet
@item login name
@item NAS short name
@item port number
@item prototype
@item port type
@item Session @sc{id}
@item Caller @sc{id}
@item Framed IP address
@item Session Start Time
@item Session Stop Time
@item Duration of the Session
@end itemize


@menu
* Options: radlast options.      Command line options.
@end menu

@comment *******************************************************************
@node radlast options, , , Radlast
@section @command{radlast} command line options
@pindex @command{radlast}, options

Use following command line options to control the behavior of
@command{radlast} utility:

@table @option
@item -@var{number}
@itemx -c @var{number}
@itemx --count @var{number}
When given this option @command{radlast} will output at most this many
lines of information. 

@item -f
@itemx --file @var{name}
Read the specified file instead of the default @file{/var/log/radwtmp}.

@item -h @var{hostname}
@itemx --host @var{hostname}
Report the logins from given host. Host can be either a name or a
"dotted quad" internet address.

@item -n @var{shortname}
@itemx --nas @var{shortname}
Report the logins from given Network Access Server (@NAS{}).

@item -l
@itemx --long-format
"Long" output format. Report all the information stored in
@file{radwtmp} file.

@item -p @var{number}
@itemx --port @var{number}
Report the logins on a given port. The port may be specified either fully or
abbreviated, e.g. @code{radlast -p 3} or @code{radlast -p S03}.

@item -s
@itemx --show-seconds
Report the duration of the login session in seconds instead of the
default days, hours and minutes.

@item -t
The same as @option{-p}. This flag is provided for compatibility with last(1).

@item -w
@itemx --wide
Widen the duration field to show seconds as well as the default days,
hours and minutes.

@end table

If multiple arguments are given, the logical OR operation between them
is assumed, i.e. the information selected by each argument
is printed. This, however, does not apply to @option{-c} option. This option is
always combined with the rest of command line by logical AND.

The pseudo-user ~reboot logs in on every reboot of network access
server.

If @command{radlast} is interrupted, it indicates to what date the search
was progressed.
