@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Raduse, Radzap, Radlast, Top
@chapter Raduse
@pindex raduse

The @code{raduse} utility shows the usage of dialup lines in the
realtime.

@menu
* Display: raduse display.      What is displayed.
* Options: raduse options.      Command line options modify the default
                                display.
* Commands: raduse commands.    Interactive mode commands. 
@end menu

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node raduse display, raduse options, , Raduse
@section Display
@cindex raduse display
@cindex display, raduse

At the top of output the summary information is displayed. It consists
of two lines. First line shows the statistic collection uptime and
current date/time. Second line shows total number of lines, number of
active lines, number of idle (inactive) lines and load percentage.

The dialup statistics is displayed in the area below. For each dialup
line three lines of data are shown.

First line shows the network access server name, port number on that
server, number of logins registered on this line, status of the line,
amount of time the line keeps the current status, and date and time
where the line has switched to the current status.

If the line is currently active, the status field displays login
name of the user logged in on this line. If the line is inactive, the
word @samp{[Idle]} is displayed.

Second and third lines display active and idle usage summary. They show
following data: total time the line is in the given state, maximum
amount of time in this state, and starting date and time when maximum
duration was perceived.

The example of default display:

@example
uptime    90+20:35         Sun Dec 17 12:21                                    
235 lines,  71 active, 164 idle. Pool load 0.30                                
                                                                               
                                                                               

max          001  2796 [idle]                 00:05 Sun Dec 17 12:16           
             43+00:17     1+22:39 Fri Sep 22 18:04 - 16:44                     
             47+20:22       06:25 Thu Oct 05 02:24 - 08:50                     
max          002  2877 [idle]                 00:09 Sun Dec 17 12:11           
             41+06:56       10:55 Sat Oct 28 21:20 - 07:15                     
             49+13:35       05:32 Mon Oct 02 00:33 - 06:05                     
max          003  3000 [idle]                 00:08 Sun Dec 17 12:12           
             39+14:42       19:44 Thu Nov 02 14:52 - 10:36                     
             50+11:22       07:29 Wed Oct 11 23:30 - 06:59                     
max          004  2829 jsmith                 00:05 Sun Dec 17 12:15           
             41+21:11     1+00:04 Sun Sep 24 12:17 - 12:21                     
             48+23:28       04:51 Sat Oct 07 03:42 - 08:33                     
max          005  2913 gray                   00:41 Sun Dec 17 11:40           
             40+12:01       15:24 Mon Dec 11 19:18 - 10:43                     
             50+08:03       11:58 Wed Nov 29 13:43 - 01:41                     
max          006  3014 roland                 00:39 Sun Dec 17 11:41           
             42+02:10       22:28 Sun Sep 24 13:46 - 12:15                     
             48+17:39       05:30 Fri Nov 24 01:57 - 07:28                     
max          007  2937 [idle]                 00:06 Sun Dec 17 12:15           
@end example

This default display can be altered using command line options or
interactive commands

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node raduse options, raduse commands, raduse display, Raduse
@section Raduse Command Line Options
@cindex raduse, command line options

The following options modify the behavior of @code{raduse}:

@table @samp
@item -b
@itemx --brief
Start up in brief mode. In this mode only first line of information for
each dialup line is displayed.
@item -d @var{count}
@itemx --display @var{count}
Show only count displays, then exit. A display is considered to be one
update of the screen.
@item -D
@itemx --dump
Dump the statistics database to the standard output and then
exit. This is for debugging purposes only.
@item -I
@itemx --no-idle-lines
Do not display idle lines. By default @code{raduse} displays all dialup
lines.
@item -i
@itemx --interactive
Use interactive mode. In this mode any input is immediately read for
processing. @ref{raduse commands} section for the description of
commands usable in interactive mode. After processing each command the
screen is updated immediately, no matter was the command understood or
not. This mode is the default when the standard output is an
intelligent terminal.
@item -n
@itemx -no-interactive
Use non-interactive mode.
@item -s @var{num}
@itemx --delay @var{num}
Specify delay in seconds between screen updates.
@item -w
@itemx --widen
Widen the time display fields to show the seconds.
@item -l
@item --list-nas
List the names and IP numbers of network access servers and then exit.
@item -h
@itemx --help
Display short usage summary.
@end table


@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node raduse commands, , raduse options, Raduse
@section Raduse Interactive Commands

The following commands are understood when @code{raduse} is in
interactive mode. Some commands require an argument. Such commands
are followed by the word @var{arg}. When @code{raduse} gets such command
it displays a prompt and waits for user to enter the necessary data.

After processing each command the screen is updated immediately,
no matter was the command understood or not.

@table @code
@item RET
Refresh the screen immediately
@item SPC
Refresh the screen immediately
@item C-l
Clear and redraw the display.
@item ^
(Caret) go to the first page.
@item b
Toggle brief display mode.
@item C-b
Move one page backwards.
@item C-f
Move one page forwards.
@item i
Toggle idle line display on or off.
@item j
Move one line forwards.
@item k
Move one line backwards.
@item G
Move to the last page.
@item $
Move to the last page.
@item q
Quit the program
@item s @var{arg}
Change the number of seconds to delay between screen updates. 
@item t @var{arg}
Display lines on a given Network Access Servers. The user is
prompted to input the NAS names. The names should be separated by
whitespace. The word @samp{all} returns to display of all NAS lines.
@end table
