@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radwho, Radlast, , Utility Programs
@section Radwho
@pindex radwho

@command{Radwho} displays the list of users currently logged in by the
Radius server.

Default output information is made compatible with that of the standard
@UNIX{} finger(1) utility. For each user the following information is
displayed: login name, name, connection protocol, @NAS{} port, login date,
@NAS{} name, assigned @IP{} or corresponding network name.

When used with @option{-l} option, the long output format is used. In
this format the following information is output:

@table @samp
@item Login
Login name of the user
@item SessionID
Unique session @sc{id} assigned by the terminal server.
@item Proto
Connection prototype.
@item Port
Port number
@item When
Login date and time
@item From
The name of @NAS{} that accepted the connection.
@item Location
Framed @IP{} or the corresponding network name.
@item Caller
Caller station @sc{id} ad reported by the @NAS{}.
@item Duration
Duration of the session.
@end table

@menu
* Options: radwho options.      Command line options.
@end menu

@comment *L2****************************************************************
@node radwho options
@subsection Radwho Command Line Options
@cindex @command{radwho}, command line options

The following command line options can be used to modify the behavior
of the program:

@table @option
@item -A
@itemx --all
Display the information about logged-out users as well. The logged-out
users are shown with Proto field set to HUP.

@item -c
@itemx --calling-id
Display the calling station @sc{id} in the second column.

@item -d NAME
@itemx --directory NAME
Set the radius configuration directory name.

@item -D @{short|abbr|full@}
@itemx --date-format @{short|abbr|full@}
Set the date representation. By default dates are output as
@code{DOW HH:MM}, where DOW means the day of week abbreviation,
HH and MM mean hours and minutes respectively. This corresponds to
option @option{-D short}. Other available formats are:

@table @samp
@item abbr
Abbreviated date: MM/DD HH:MM, where MM is a two-digit month number,
DD --- a two-digit day of month.
@item full
Full data output, like this:

@example
Mon Dec 18 12:29:38 EET 2000
@end example

@end table

@item -e STRING
@itemx --empty STRING
Display any empty field as STRING. This is useful when the output of
@command{radwho} is fed to some analyzing program, as it helps to keep
the same number of columns on each line of output.

@item -F
@itemx --finger
Start in fingerd mode. In this mode @command{radwho} emulates the
behavior of fingerd(8) utility. Use this option if starting
@command{radwho} from the /etc/inetd.conf line like this:

@example
finger stream tcp nowait nobody /usr/sbin/radwho radwho -fL
@end example

@noindent
This mode is also enabled by default if @command{radwho} notices that its
name (argv[0]) is @samp{fingerd} or @samp{in.fingerd}.

@item -H
@itemx --no-header
Don't display header line.

@item -i
@itemx --session-id
Display session @sc{id} instead of @sc{gecos} in the second column.

@item -I @{smart|ip|nodomain@}
@itemx --ip-format @{smart|ip|nodomain@}
Change @IP{} representation. The meaning of the argument is as follows:

@table @samp
@item smart
Select the best representation. The following rules apply:

@enumerate 1
@item For a @NAS{} use its short name from @file{naslist}. If there is no
short name, use its long name. If there is no long name either, go to
2.
@item Resolve @IP{} to FQDN.
@item If the IP cannot be resolved, use dotted-quad representation of
the IP
@end enumerate

@item ip
Display IP in dotted-quad form.

@item nodomain
If the IP can be resolved to a fully qualified domain name, use the
hostname part of it, i.e. any characters up to the first dot.
@end table

@item -u
@itemx --local-also
Display information about local users from the system @file{utmp} file.
May prove useful when running @command{radwho} as a finger daemon.

@item -n
@itemx --no-resolve
Do not resolve @IP{}. It is a synonym for -I ip.

@item -o FORMAT
@itemx --format FORMAT
Select customized output format. This can also be changed by setting
the value of environment variable @code{RADWHO_FORMAT}.
The format string is a comma-separated list of format specifications
in one of the following forms:

@table @asis
@item @var{field}
Output @var{field} with its default width, heading and alignment. The
field names and corresponding default values are discussed in detail below.
@item @var{field}:@var{width}
Output @var{field}, use column width @var{width}. If @var{width} starts
with @samp{+}, the field will be right-aligned, if it starts with
@samp{-}, the field will be left-aligned. Otherwise the default
alignment will be used
@item @var{field}:@var{width}:@var{heading}
The same as above, but also supplies the heading for the column
@end table

The field names are:

@table @code
@item login
Login name

@item orig
Original login name as supplied with the request.

@item port
@NAS{} port number

@item sid
The Session @sc{id}

@item nas
The @NAS{} name or @IP{}.

@item ip
Framed @IP{} assigned to the user, if it is provided framed
service.

@item proto
Connection protocol. Its possible values are:

@itemize @bullet
@item @samp{PPP} for a point-to-point link
@item @samp{SLIP} for a SLIP link
@item @samp{HUP} for closed session
@item @samp{shell} for shell user
@end itemize

@item date
Date/time when the session started

@item delay
Delay time @ref{Acct-Delay-Time}.

@item type
Entry type in decimal.

@item ptype
Port type. This is one of the following letters:

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .50
@item Type @tab Meaning
@item @samp{L}
@tab Local connection
@item @samp{R}
@tab Rlogin connection
@item @samp{S}
@tab SLIP connection
@item @samp{C}
@tab CSLIP connection
@item @samp{P}
@tab PPP connection
@item @samp{A}
@tab Auto PPP connection
@item @samp{E}
@tab Telnet session
@item @samp{T}
@tab ``Clear TCP'' connection
@item @samp{U}
@tab TCP login service
@item @samp{!}
@tab Console session
@item @samp{X}
@tab Shell
@end multitable

@item time
Total time of the session duration.

@item clid
The calling station @sc{id}.

@item uname
The @sc{gecos} field from local /etc/passwd, corresponding to the login name.
If the user does not have a local account, his login name is output.

@end table

@item -s
@itemx --secure
Run in secure mode. Queries without a user name are rejected.

@end table
