@c This is part of the Radius manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1999,2000,2001 Sergey Poznyakoff
@c See file radius.texi for copying conditions.
@comment *******************************************************************
@node Radzap, Radgrep, Raduse, Utility Programs
@section Radzap
@pindex radzap
@cindex Deleting hung user sessions

@command{radzap} searches the Radius accounting database for matching login
records and closes them.

At least one of @option{-n}, @option{-p} options or username must be
specified. If they are used in conjunction, they are taken as if
joined by logical @sc{and} operation.

@samp{radzap} operates in two modes: silent and confirm. The silent
mode is enabled by default. When run in this mode, radzap deletes
every record that matched the search conditions given.

In confirm mode @samp{radzap} will ask for a confirmation
before zapping each matching record. Every line beginning with a @samp{y}
is taken as positive response, otherwise it is taken as negative
response.

The confirm mode is toggled by the command line option @option{-c}.

@subheading Syntax

@example
radzap [options] [username]
@end example

@noindent
Options are:

@table @option
@item -c
@itemx --confirm
Enable confirm mode. 
@item -d @var{dir}
@itemx --directory @var{dir}
Specify alternate configuration directory. Default is @file{@value{RADDB}}.
@item -f @var{file}
@itemx --file @var{file}
Operate on @var{file} instead of the default
@file{@var{RADLOG}/radutmp}.
@item -l @var{dir}
@itemx --log-directory @var{dir}
Search file @file{radutmp} in the given directory. @emph{Note}, that
this option is deprecated. It is currently retained for backward
compatibility with previous versions.
@item -q
@itemx --quiet
Disable confirm mode.
@item -h
@itemx --help
Display short help summary and exit.
@item -n @var{name}
@itemx --nas @var{name}
Specify @NAS{} name to zap user from.
@item -p @var{port}
@itemx --port @var{port}
Specify the port number of the session to be zapped. The port number
can be specified either in its full form, i.e @code{radzap -p S02} or in
its short form, like @code{radzap -p 2}.

@end table
