.\" $Id$
.so config.so
.TH BUILDDBM 8 "March 10, 2000" "FSF"
.SH NAME
builddbm - build a DBM version of Radius users database
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBbuilddbm\fR
[\fB-d\fR config_dir]
[input_file]
.PP
\fBbuilddbm\fR
\fB-h\fR
.SH NOTE
The information in this manpage may be obsolete or incomplete. Please
refer to texinfo documentation for full information about GNU Radius
tools.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBBuilddbm\fR converts the plaintext \fBRadius\fR users database into
DBM files. Some versions of \fBRadius\fR daemon have used this to
speed up the access to the users database.
.PP
Howewer in this implementation of \fBRadius\fR daemon things go the
other way around. The server reads entire plaintext database, converts
it into internal form and stores into hash table which provides for
fast access. Actually, using DBM version of the users database slows
down the access unless the machine which runs \fBRadius\fR daemon is
short of address space for the daemon to store the users database into.
.PP
Optionally, \fBRadius\fR daemon can use both plaintext and DBM
databases, in which case it first looks up the user in the former, and
if not found, continues search in the latter.
.SH OPERATION
When used without arguments, \fBbuilddbm\fR utility attempts to
convert file \fB\*(RD/users\fR into \fB\*(RD/users.db\fR or
\fB\*(RD/users.pag, \*(RD/users.dir\fR pair depending on the
version of DBM library used.
.PP
If used with one argument, the argument is taken as the name of the
plaintext database file to operate upon.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -d
Specifies alternate directory for the \fBRadius\fR users database
files. This defaults to \*(RD.
.IP -i
Specifies alternate input file.
.IP -h
Outputs short usage summary and exits with 0 exit code.
.SH FILES
.IP \*(RD/users
Default plaintext database.
.IP \*(RD/users.db
Default output file.
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff, gray@farlep.net

.SH SEE ALSO
users(5rad), radiusd(8rad), config(5rad)


