.\" $Id$
.so config.so
.TH radctl 8 "March 10, 2000" "FSF"
.SH NAME
radctl - Radius daemon control interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBradctl\fR -s command [options]
.br
\fBradctl\fR [\fB-d, --directory\fR DIR][\fB-S, --server\fR ID]
[\fB-u, --user\fR NAME][\fB-p, --password\fR PASS][\fB-v, --verbose\fR]
.br
\fBradctl\fR \fB-h\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
This command is a control interface to \fBradiusd\fR daemon. It allows
administrator to query it about various aspects of its work and issue
administrative commands to it. 

\fBRadctl\fR communicates with radius using either a regular
UNIX-style signal interface or a special UDP control channel.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-s, --signal"
Use UNIX-style signal interface.

.IP "-d, --directory DIR"
Specifies the directory where radius dictionary files and \fBradctl.rc\fR
file reside.

.IP "-S, --server ID"
Specifies the name of the server to connect to. \fBPlease note\fR that
this is not a domain name, but rather the server ID under which it was
registered using \fI(set! rad-server-list ...)\fR statement in
\fBradctl.rc\fR file.

.IP "-u, --user NAME"
Specifies the username. If you start \fBradctl\fR without this option,
you will have to issue \fBuser\fR command from inside it.

.IP "-l, --login NAME"
An alias for \fB-u, --user\fR option.

.IP "-v, --verbose"
Enable verbose mode. In verbose mode all conversation with the
Radius server is echoed on stderr.

.IP "-h, --help"
Display short usage help and exit.

.SH COMMANDS

A command in radctl interactive mode consists of a command verb and
optional arguments. Any non-ambiguous abbreviated form of a command
verb is accepted. Command arguments, however, may not be abbreviated.

These are commands that control the operation of the \fBradctl\fR
monitor itself:

.IP help
Output short help information.

.IP "quit, bye"
Exit the program.

.IP server
Display the ID of the current radius server.

.IP "server ID"
Set current radius server.

.IP verbose
Toggle verbose mode on/off. When verbose mode is on, \fBradctl\fR
displays to stderr detailed log of its conversation with Radius
server.

.IP "login, user NAME"
Use NAME as administrative user login name.

.IP "password PASS"
Use the specified password. If `\fB.\fR' (dot) is entered instead of
plaintext password, \fBradctl\fR reads the password from /dev/tty with
character echoing turned off and generation of signals by tty special
characters disabled. This reduces the possibility of the password being
compromised.

.IP "list, list active"
Display detailed information about current radius server.

.IP "list avail"
List available radius servers. Only server ID and hostname (or IP
address) are listed.

These commands are sent directly to the server:

.IP getpid
Output the PID of the master Radius process.

.IP get-m-stat
Display detailed memory usage statistics.

.IP get-q-stat
Display detailed queue statistics. Four fields are displayed for each
queue:
.IP
Queue number
.IP
Number of pending requests
.IP
Number of processed requests still residing in the queue
.IP
Total number of requests in queue

.IP dumpdb
Tells \fBradiusd\fR to dump its user database, i.e. the parsed
contents of files \fBhints\fR, \fBhuntgroups\fR and \fBusers\fR
from the \fB\*(RD\fR directory to disk file. The filename is
\fR\*(RL/radius.parse\fB.

.SH FILES
.IP \*(RD/radctl.rc
.IP $HOME/.radctl
Initialization files.

.SH BUGS
The information in this manpage may be obsolete or incomplete. Please
refer to texinfo documentation for full information about GNU Radius
tools.

.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff, gray@farlep.net

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8rad)
