.\" $Id$
.ds RD /etc/raddb
.ds RL /usr/adm
.ds RP /etc/raddb
.TH RadiusD 8 "March 10, 2000" "FSF"
.SH NAME
radiusd - Authentication and accounting server
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBradiusd\fR
[\fB-A\fR]
[\fB-a\fR acct_dir]
[\fB-b\fR[\fBb\fR]]
[\fB-d\fR config_dir]
[\fB-f\fR]
[\fB-l\fR log_dir]
[\fB-N\fR]
[\fB-n\fR]
[\fB-p\fR port]
[\fB-Ssv\fR]
[\fB-x\fR debug_level]
[\fB-yz\fR]
.SH NOTE
The information in this manpage may be obsolete or incomplete. Please
refer to texinfo documentation for full information about GNU Radius
tools.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBradiusd\fR is the server implementing \fBRADIUS\fR protocol.
.PP
\fBRADIUS\fR is a protocol spoken between the network access server
(\fBNAS\fR) and the auhtentication server. The network access server
is typically a device accepting connections from several modem lines
and the authentication server is the server which decides whether some
user has the right to log in or he has not. This is called authentication.
.PP
Also, when the user logs in or out, the \fBNAS\fR sends login and
logout packets. These packets are received by the \fBradius\fR server
and recorded appropriately. This is called accounting.
.PP
Upon startup, \fBradius\fR server listens the following two ports:
authentication (default 1645), accounting (1646).
When configured with \fB--enable-snmp\fR option, \fBradiusd\fR also starts
listening on the specified SNMP port.
.PP
Upon receiving a packet from any of the above ports, the server performs
the following:
.IP "1. checks the authenticity of the request"
Depending on the type of the request this check is based on the source
IP address.
.IP "2. looks up the request queue for duplicates"
If a request is found in the queue, it gets dropped and the appropriate
diagnostics is output to the Warning channel.
.IP "3. registers request in the queue"
This is needed to prevent any eventual duplicates of this packet from being
processed.
.IP "4. processes and answers the request"
A child process may be forked during this stage to handle the request.
.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.IP -A
Write a file named \fBdetail.auth\fR in the same directory as
\fBdetail\fR file. This file contains all the Attribute-Value pairs
for each authentication packet. Normally this should be used for
debugging purposes.
.IP -a
Specify alternate directory for accounting. Usually this defaults to
\fB\*(RL/radacct\fR.
.IP -b
If the \fBradiusd\fR server was configured with \fB--enable-dbm\fR
option, this flag instructs it to use the DBM version of the users
database (\fB\*(RD/users.db\fR or \fB\*(RD/users.pag\fR,
\fB\*(RD/users.dir\fR pair) instead of the plain text file
(\fB\*(RD/users\fR).
.IP
Note that this makes the processing of each authentication request
\fBmuch more slower\fR when the number of users grows beyong some
limit.
.IP
If this option is used twice, i.e. [-\fBbb\fR], it instructs the
server to use both databases. In this case it first searches the login
name in the internal hash (== in the plain text database), and if
not found there, the server looks up the DBM database. This can be
used to use the plain text database for keeping the information for those
users that require the quickest possible auhtentication, and the DBM files
to keep the information about those that can tolerate some delays in
processing.
.IP -d
Specifies alternate name for the configuration
directory. \fBRadiusd\fR looks there for its configuration files. It
defaults to \fB\*(RD\fR.
.IP -f
Instructs the server to not detach itself from the controlling
terminal. This is used for debugging.
.IP -l
Specifies alternate name for logging directory. \fBRadiusd\fR writes
there its logfile(s). The default is \fB\*(RL\fR.
.IP -p
Specifies alternate port for authentication requests. The port number
for accounting requests is determined by adding 1 to this number. Port
number should be specified in decimal. Defaults are 1645 and 1646.
.IP -S
Strip off the suffix and prefix from the username before writing it to
the \fBdetail\fR file.
.IP -s
Tells the authentication server to operate in single process
mode. When specified this flag, the authentications server will handle
each request itself instead of forking child process to do that. This
slows down the authentication processing to a crawl and should only be
used for debugging purposes. The most convenient use is with the
\fB-f\fR option.
.IP -v
When given this option \fBradiusd\fR prints on the standard output its
version number, compilation flags and the file names it uses and exits
with zero code.
.IP -x
Sets the debug level. The level should be specified as decimal, octal
or hex number. The usage of this option is discouraged. Use
\fBdebug\fR statement in the configuration file instead.
.IP -y
Write in the log file detailed information about each authentication
request. The information is logged under \fBauth\fR loglevel.
.IP -z
Log the password along with user name for each login. This is very
insecure.

.SH CONFIGURATION
\fBRadiusd\fR uses rather complicated configuration file suite. The
files live in \fB\*(RD\fR directory. The place of their location
can be overriden using \fB-d\fr option.
.PP
The configuration files are:
.IP config
This file contains all the configurable parameters of the server
itself: logging options, debug levels, notification and SNMP options,
etc.
.IP users
The plaintext users database. Contains the per-user authorization and
accounting information.
.IP users.db
Or users.dir, users.pag pair. The DBM version of the users
database. This is used when the server is compiled with
\fB--enable-dbm\fR option and either \fB-b\fR flag is specified in the
command line, or one of \fBusedbm always\fR, \fBusedbm also\fR options is
used in \fBconfig\fR file.
.IP radius.deny
The list of users whose access is denied for some reason.
.IP dictionary
Defines the symbolic representation of the \fBRadius\fR attributes,
attribute values, etc. Usually should not be modified.
.IP naslist
The list of network access servers that are allowed to use this
\fBRadius\fR server. This file specifies for each \fBNAS\fR its long
and short names, NAS type, and possibly its IP pool.
.IP clients
The list of IP addresses and secred keys for each \fBNAS\fR that wants
to communicate to the server.
.IP hints
The \fBradius\fR server can alter its politics towards a user
depending on its login name. It can, for example, supply a different
kind of service, assign it the IP number, etc. To do so the server
consults this file. This extends the Prefix/Suffix functionality of
the \fILivingstone 2.0\fR server.
.IP huntgroups
Defines the huntgroups. The huntgroup is a class of users that have
some common characteristics. 

.SH FILES
.IP \*(RD/
Configuration files directory
.PP
.IP \*(RL/radius.log
Default logfile.
.IP \*(RL/radacct
Accounting directory.
.IP \*(RP/radius.pid
Holds the PID number of the master \fBRadius\fR process.
.PP

.SH BUGS
Hmm, probalbly there are some. Bug reports are welcome.
.PP
This manpage is very scarce. Refer to texinfo documentation for full
info.

.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff, gray@farlep.net

.SH SEE ALSO
users(5rad), config(5rad), dictionary(5rad), naslist(5rad), clients(5rad),
hints(5rad), huntgroups(5rad), builddbm(8rad), radlast(1rad), raduse(1rad),
radwho(1rad), radzap(8rad), radctl(8rad), radgrep(1rad),
radping(8rad), radtest(8rad), radsnmp(8rad)
.PP
