.\" $Id$
.ds RD /etc/raddb
.ds RL /usr/adm
.ds RP /etc/raddb
.TH radlast 1 "March 10, 2000" "FSF"
.SH NAME
radlast - report last logins from Radius database.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBradlast\fR
[\fB-f\fR file]
[\fB-h\fR host]
[\fB-n\fR nas]
[\fB-l\fR]
[\fB-p\fR port]
[\fB-s\fR]
[\fB-t\fR port]
[\fB-w\fR]
[\fB-#\fR]
[user ...]
.SH NOTE
The information in this manpage may be obsolete or incomplete. Please
refer to texinfo documentation for full information about GNU Radius
tools.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBRadlast\fR lists the session of specified users, NASes, NAS ports
and hosts, in reverse time order. By default, each line of output
contains the login name, NAS short name and port number from where the
session was conducted, host IP address or name, the start and stop
times for the session, and the duration of the session. If the session
is still continuing, \fBradlast\fR will so indicate.
.PP
When specified the \fB-l\fR option, the following fields are output:
login name, NAS short name, port number, prototype, port type, Session
ID, Caller ID, Framed IP address, start and stop time of the session,
and the duration of the session.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -#
Where \fB#\fR represents any decimal number. When given this option
\fBradlast\fR will output at most this many lines of information.
For compatibility with some versions of last(1), the
initial \fB-\fR sign can be omitted.
.IP -f
Read the specified file instead of the default \fB\*(RL/radwtmp\fR.

.IP -h
Report the logins from given host. Host can be either a name or a
"dotted quad" internet address.

.IP -n
Report the logins from given Network Access Server (NAS).

.IP -l
"Long" output format. Report all the information stored in
\fBradwtmp\fR file.

.IP -p
Report the logins on a given port. The port may be specified fully or
abbreviated, e.g. ``radlast -p 3'' or ``radlast -p S03''.

.IP -s
Report the duration of the login session in seconds instead of the
default days, hours and minutes.

.IP -t
See \fB-p\fR. This flag is provided for compatibility with last(1).

.IP -w
Widen the duration field to show seconds as well as the default days,
hours and minutes.

.PP
If multiple arguments are given, the logical OR operation between them
is assumed, i.e. the information that applies to any of the arguments
is printed. This does not apply to \fB-#\fR option. This option is
always combined with the rest of command line by logical AND.
.PP
The pseudo-user ~reboot logs in on every reboot of network access
server.
.PP
If \fBradlast\fR is interrupted, it indicates to what date the search
was progressed.

.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff, gray@farlep.net

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8rad), radwho(1rad), radzap(8rad), radgrep(1rad)
