.\" $Id$
.so config.so
.TH raduse 1 "March 10, 2000" "FSF"
.SH NAME
raduse - monitor the usage of dialup lines.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBraduse\fR
[\fB-b\fR]
[\fB-d\fR count]
[\fB-D\fR]
[\fB-I\fR]
[\fB-i\fR|\fB-n\fR]
[\fB-s\fR delay]
[\fB-w\fR]
[NAS ...]
.PP
\fBraduse -l\fR
.PP
\fBraduse -h\fR
.SH NOTE
The information in this manpage may be obsolete or incomplete. Please
refer to texinfo documentation for full information about GNU Radius
tools.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBRaduse\fR monitors the activity of dialup lines.
.PP
When used without arguments, it displays statistics about every dialup
line served by \fBRadius\fR server. Otherwise, each argument is
expected to be the name of the network access server for which the
information is to be displayed.
.PP
At the top of output the summary information is displayed. It consists
of two lines. First line shows the statistic collection uptime and
current date/time. Second line shows total number of lines, number of
active lines, number of idle (inactive) lines and load percentage.
.PP
The dialup statistics is displayed in the area below. For each dialup
line three lines of data are shown.
.PP
First line shows the network access server name, port number on that
server, number of logins registered on this line, status of the line,
amount of time the line keeps the current status, and date and time
where the line has switched to the current status.
.PP
If the line is currently active, the status field displays login
name of the user logged in on this line. If the line is inactive, the
word \fB[Idle]\fR is displayed.
.PP
Second and third lines display active and idle usage summary. They show
following data: total time the line is in the given state, maximum
amount of time in this state, and starting date and time when maximum
duration was perceived.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP -b
Start up in brief mode. In this mode only first line of information for
each dialup line is displayed.
.IP -d
Show only count displays, then exit. A display is considered to be one
update of the screen.
.IP -D
Dump the statistics database to the standard output and then
exit. This is for debugging purposes only.
.IP -I
Do not display idle lines. By default \fBraduse\fR displays all dialup
lines.
.IP -i
Use interactive mode. In this mode any input is immediately read for
processing. See the \fBCOMMANDS\fR section for the description of
commands usable in interactive mode. After processing each command the
screen is updated immediately, no matter was the command understood or
not. This mode is the default when the standard output is an
intelligent terminal.
.IP -n
Use non-interactive mode.
.IP -s
Specify delay in seconds between screen updates.
.IP -w
Widen the time display fields to show the seconds.
.IP -l
List the names and IP numbers of network access servers and then exit.
.IP -h
Display short usage summary.

.SH COMMANDS
When in interactive mode, \fBraduse\fR reads commands from the
terminal and acts upon them accordingly. Each command is either a
single letter or a combination control+letter. The command is
reacted upon immediately, unless it needs some additional information,
in which case the user will be prompted to enter such
information. While entering this information, erase and kill keys, as
set up by stty command, are recognized and a newline terminates the
input.
.PP
The following commands are understood (C-L means control-L):
.PP
.IP newline
Refresh the screen immediately
.IP space
Refresh the screen immediately
.IP C-L
Clear and redraw the display.
.IP ^
(Caret) go to the first page.
.IP b
Toggle brief display mode.
.IP C-b
Move one page backwards.
.IP C-f
Move one page forwards.
.IP i
Toggle idle line display on or off.
.IP j
Move one line forwards.
.IP k
Move one line backwards.
.IP G
Move to the last page.
.IP $
Move to the last page.
.IP q
Quit the program
.IP s
Change the number of seconds to delay between screen updates. Prompts
user to input the number desired.
.IP t
Display information about given Network Access Servers. Prompts user
to input the NAS names. The names should be separated by
whitespace. The word \fBall\fR returns to display of all NAS lines.

.SH FILES
.IP \*(RD/naslist
The list of network access servers

.IP \*(RL/radacct/radstat
Radius statistics.

.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff, gray@farlep.net

.SH SEE ALSO
radiusd(8rad), radwho(1rad), radgrep(1rad), naslist(5rad)

